## OSI Model - Overview

The OSI (**O**pen **S**ystems **I**nterconnection) Model is a
 standardised model which we use to demonstrate the theory behind 
computer networking. In practice, it's actually the more compact TCP/IP 
model that real-world networking is based off; however the OSI model, in
 many ways, is easier to get an initial understanding from.

The OSI model consists of seven layers:

![Table showing the OSI layers Application, Presentation, Session, Transport, Network, Data Link, Physical](https://muirlandoracle.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/OSI-Table.png)

There
 are many mnemonics floating around to help you learn the layers of the 
OSI model -- search around until you find one that you like.

I personally favour: **A**nxious **P**ale **S**hakespeare **T**reated **N**ervous **D**runks **P**atiently

Let's briefly take a look at each of these in turn:

<u>Layer 7 -- Application</u><u>:</u>

The
 application layer of the OSI model essentially provides networking 
options to programs running on a computer. It works almost exclusively 
with applications, providing an interface for them to use in order to 
transmit data. When data is given to the application layer, it is passed
 down into the presentation layer.

<u>Layer 6 -- Presentation</u><u>:</u>

The
 presentation layer receives data from the application layer. This data 
tends to be in a format that the application understands, but it's not 
necessarily in a standardised format that could be understood by the 
application layer in the *receiving* computer. The presentation 
layer translates the data into a standardised format, as well as 
handling any encryption, compression or other transformations to the 
data. With this complete, the data is passed down to the session layer.

<u>Layer 5 -- Session</u><u>:</u>

When
 the session layer receives the correctly formatted data from the 
presentation layer, it looks to see if it can set up a connection with 
the other computer across the network. If it can't then it sends back an
 error and the process goes no further. If a session *can* be 
established then it's the job of the session layer to maintain it, as 
well as co-operate with the session layer of the remote computer in 
order to synchronise communications. The session layer is particularly 
important as the session that it creates is unique to the communication 
in question. This is what allows you to make multiple requests to 
different endpoints simultaneously without all the data getting mixed up
 (think about opening two tabs in a web browser at the same time)! When 
the session layer has successfully logged a connection between the host 
and remote computer the data is passed down to Layer 4: the transport 
Layer.

<u>Layer 4 -- Transport</u><u>:</u>

The transport 
layer is a very interesting layer that serves numerous important 
functions. Its first purpose is to choose the protocol over which the 
data is to be transmitted. The two most common protocols in the 
transport layer are TCP (**T**ransmission **C**ontrol **P**rotocol) and UDP (**U**ser **D**atagram **P**rotocol); with TCP the transmission is *connection-based* which means that a connection between the computers is established and 
maintained for the duration of the request. This allows for a reliable 
transmission, as the connection can be used to ensure that the packets *all* get
 to the right place. A TCP connection allows the two computers to remain
 in constant communication to ensure that the data is sent at an 
acceptable speed, and that any lost data is re-sent. With UDP, the 
opposite is true; packets of data are essentially thrown at the 
receiving computer -- if it can't keep up then that's *its* problem
 (this is why a video transmission over something like Skype can be 
pixelated if the connection is bad). What this means is that TCP would 
usually be chosen for situations where accuracy is favoured over speed 
(e.g. file transfer, or loading a webpage), and UDP would be used in 
situations where speed is more important (e.g. video streaming).

With
 a protocol selected, the transport layer then divides the transmission 
up into bite-sized pieces (over TCP these are called *segments*, over UDP they're called *datagrams*), which makes it easier to transmit the message successfully.

<u>Layer 3 -- Network:</u>

The
 network layer is responsible for locating the destination of your 
request. For example, the Internet is a huge network; when you want to 
request information from a webpage, it's the network layer that takes 
the IP address for the page and figures out the best route to take. At 
this stage we're working with what is referred to as *Logical* addressing
 (i.e. IP addresses) which are still software controlled. Logical 
addresses are used to provide order to networks, categorising them and 
allowing us to properly sort them. Currently the most common form of 
logical addressing is the IPV4 format, which you'll likely already be 
familiar with (i.e 192.168.1.1 is a common address for a home router).

<u>Layer 2 -- Data Link:</u>

The data link layer focuses on the *physical* addressing
 of the transmission. It receives a packet from the network layer (that 
includes the IP address for the remote computer) and adds in the 
physical (MAC) address of the receiving endpoint. Inside every network enabled computer is a Network Interface Card (NIC) which comes with a unique MAC (Media Access Control) address to identify it.

MAC addresses are set by the manufacturer and literally burnt into the card; they can't be changed -- although they *can* be
 spoofed. When information is sent across a network, it's actually the 
physical address that is used to identify where exactly to send the 
information.

Additionally, it's also the job of the data link layer to present the data in a format suitable for transmission.

The
 data link layer also serves an important function when it receives 
data, as it checks the received information to make sure that it hasn't 
been corrupted during transmission, which could well happen when the 
data is transmitted by layer 1: the physical layer.

<u>Layer 1 -- Physical:</u>

The
 physical layer is right down to the hardware of the computer. This is 
where the electrical pulses that make up data transfer over a network 
are sent and received. It's the job of the physical layer to convert the
 binary data of the transmission into signals and transmit them across 
the network, as well as receiving incoming signals and converting them 
back into binary data.

---

## Encapsulation

As the data is passed down each layer of 
the model, more information containing details specific to the layer in 
question is added on to the start of the transmission. As an example, 
the header added by the Network Layer would include things like the 
source and destination IP addresses, and the header added by the 
Transport Layer would include (amongst other things) information 
specific to the protocol being used.Â The data link layer also adds a piece on at the *end* of
 the transmission, which is used to verify that the data has not been 
corrupted on transmission; this also has the added bonus of increased 
security, as the data can't be intercepted and tampered with without 
breaking the trailer. This whole process is referred to as *encapsulation;* the process by which data can be sent from one computer to another.

![Encapsulation process](https://muirlandoracle.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/image.jpeg)

Notice
 that the encapsulated data is given a different name at different steps
 of the process. In layers 7,6 and 5, the data is simply referred to as 
data. In the transport layer the encapsulated data is referred to as a 
segment or a datagram (depending on whether TCP or UDP has been selected
 as a transmission protocol). At the Network Layer, the data is referred
 to as a packet. When the packet gets passed down to the Data Link layer
 it becomes a frame, and by the time it's transmitted across a network 
the frame has been broken down into bits.

When
 the message is received by the second computer, it reverses the process
 -- starting at the physical layer and working up until it reaches the 
application layer, stripping off the added information as it goes. This 
is referred to as *de-encapsulation.* As such you can think of the 
layers of the OSI model as existing inside every computer with network 
capabilities. Whilst it's not actually as clear cut in practice, 
computers all follow the same process of encapsulation to send data and 
de-encapsulation upon receiving it.

The
 processes of encapsulation and de-encapsulation are very important -- 
not least because of their practical use, but also because they give us a
 standardised method for sending data. This means that all transmissions
 will consistently follow the same methodology, allowing any network 
enabled device to send a request to any other reachable device and be 
sure that it will be understood -- regardless of whether they are from 
the same manufacturer; use the same operating system; or any other 
factors.

---

## TCP/IP

The
 TCP/IP model is, in many ways, very similar to the OSI model. It's a 
few years older, and serves as the basis for real-world networking. The
 TCP/IP model consists of four layers: Application, Transport, Internet 
and Network Interface. Between them, these cover the same range of 
functions as the seven layers of the OSI Model.

![The layesrs of the TCP/IP model Application, Transport,Internet, Network Interface](https://muirlandoracle.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/image-4.png)

***Note:** Some
 recent sources split the TCP/IP model into five layers -- breaking the 
Network Interface layer into Data Link and Physical layers (as with the 
OSI model). This is accepted and well-known; however, it is not 
officially defined (unlike the original four layers which are defined in
 RFC1122). It's up to you which version you use -- both are generally 
considered valid.*

You would be justified in asking why we 
bother with the OSI model if it's not actually used for anything in the 
real-world. The answer to that question is quite simply that the OSI 
model (due to being less condensed and more rigid than the TCP/IP model)
 tends to be easier for learning the initial theory of networking.

The two models match up something like this:

![Comparison between the TCP/IP and OSI models](https://muirlandoracle.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/image-3.png)

The
 processes of encapsulation and de-encapsulation work in exactly the 
same way with the TCP/IP model as they do with the OSI model. At each 
layer of the TCP/IP model a header is added during encapsulation, and 
removed during de-encapsulation.

---

Now let's get down to the practical side of things.

A
 layered model is great as a visual aid -- it shows us the general 
process of how data can be encapsulated and sent across a network, but 
how does it actually happen?

When we talk about TCP/IP, it's all 
well and good to think about a table with four layers in it, but we're 
actually talking about a suite of protocols -- sets of rules that define
 how an action is to be carried out. TCP/IP takes its name from the two 
most important of these: the **T**ransmission **C**ontrol **P**rotocol (which we touched upon earlier in the OSI model) that controls the flow of data between two endpoints, and the **I**nternet **P**rotocol,
 which controls how packets are addressed and sent. There are many more 
protocols that make up the TCP/IP suite; we will cover some of these in 
later tasks. For now though, let's talk about TCP.

As mentioned earlier, TCP is a *connection-based* protocol. In other words, before you send any data via TCP, you must 
first form a stable connection between the two computers. The process of
 forming this connection is called the *three-way handshake*.

When
 you attempt to make a connection, your computer first sends a special 
request to the remote server indicating that it wants to initialise a 
connection. This request contains something called a *SYN* (short for *synchronise*)
 bit, which essentially makes first contact in starting the connection 
process. The server will then respond with a packet containing the SYN 
bit, as well as another "acknowledgement" bit, called *ACK*. 
Finally, your computer will send a packet that contains the ACK bit by 
itself, confirming that the connection has been setup successfully. With
 the three-way handshake successfully completed, data can be reliably 
transmitted between the two computers. Any data that is lost or 
corrupted on transmission is re-sent, thus leading to a connection which
 appears to be lossless.

![The three way handshake](https://muirlandoracle.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/image-2.png)

![Frank Synacktra  humour value only](https://muirlandoracle.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/syn-acktra.jpeg)

*(Credit Kieran Smith, Abertay University)*

We're not going to go into exactly *how* this
 works on a step-to-step level -- not in this room at any rate. It is 
sufficient to know that the three-way handshake must be carried out 
before a connection can be established using TCP.

---

**<u>History:</u>**

It's important to understand exactly *why* the
 TCP/IP and OSI models were originally created. To begin with there was 
no standardisation -- different manufacturers followed their own 
methodologies, and consequently systems made by different manufacturers 
were completely incompatible when it came to networking. The TCP/IP 
model was introduced by the American DoD in 1982 to provide a standard 
-- something for all of the different manufacturers to follow. This 
sorted out the inconsistency problems. Later the OSI model was also 
introduced by the International Organisation for Standardisation ([ISO](https://www.iso.org/home.html));
 however, it's mainly used as a more comprehensive guide for learning, 
as the TCP/IP model is still the standard upon which modern networking 
is based.
